CONTEXT

1. Archiving Nature

While the concept of biodiversity is in no way new, the term arose as an area of political and scientific concern in the 1980s (Youatt 2015, pg. 27). This focus on variability within and between species and ecosystems arose out of a period when so much of this variance was declining. Edward O. Wilson, considered the “father of biodiversity” and who would later go on to orchestrate the largest census of nonhuman species ever performed, described the multitude of forces that lead to species loss with the acronym HIPPO, representing habitat destruction, invasive species, pollution, population (for example, more people increases the other HIPPO effects) and overharvesting (2003, pg 50-51). 

Industrial agriculture’s reliance on pesticides and practices of monocropping in particular have resulted in an erosion of crop genetic diversity (Shiva, 2015). In the last 100 years, more than 90% of crop varieties have disappeared from the world’s farms, and currently an estimated 75% of the world’s food comes from only 12 plant species (Guendel, 2004). Access to diverse plant species allows farmers and plant breeders to produce crop varieties that are more resilient and better adapted to their local habitat, resulting in a much greater crop yield and a stronger and more secure food source (Plucknett & Nigel, 1987, p. 3).  As such, biodiversity both suffers as a result of and has the ability to combat genetic drift and the loss of crop varieties. 

Plant species are ever changing. They may need to be replanted season by season, and in this way the practice of storing seeds is engrained in agricultural practices. As the seeds that farmers use have become more and more standardized and older species have diminished on the land of farmers, the community of those pooling resources together in order to share and conserve seeds has grown. Community seed banks gather and store seeds which represent the local habitat and are best adapted to withstand native pests, soil composition, diseases and climatic variations. 

Recently, these banks have also begun to take the form of even larger global repositories (Van ‘t Wout et al., 2014, p.1-7). Botanical gardens, research institutes and government entities now consider these seeds natural resources, and ones that need to be protected. Building infrastructure to house large numbers of seeds and keep them at ideal conditions for storage, these large repositories create secure backups of local seed repositories from the around the world, providing benefits that may not be available to smaller community seed banks, such as technical expertise, sophisticated storage facilities, assistance in monitoring viability and regenerating materials when needed (Fowler, 2008).

2. Practices of Memory and the Defetishization of Species

	Our practices of seed preservation have moved from seasonal to archival. The collection and long term storage of seeds has become less of a temporary practice and more of a long term memory tool. In Memory Practices in the Sciences, Geoffrey Bawker describes our practices of creating “biodiversity panopticons” as a means of cataloging all of the natural world, so that we may better control it. Summarizing the work of Michel Serres, he writes “we are now as a species taking on the role of managing the planet as a whole - its ecosystems and energy flows. We now see nature as essentially only possible through human mediation” (2005, pg 120-121).We identify the needs for practices such as seed banking as an outcome of our own actions. As a result, we attempt to control our surrounds, often forcing our own structures of organization onto nature. 

	While maintaining this kind of database of nature may lead to new technologies and insight, implied in these actions is the assumption that, through our mediation, species protection can occur. Understanding species lends itself to our practices of planetary protection. Implied in these practices however is the assumption that we are capable of thoroughly understanding the complex processes by which organisms interact with each other. Out classification defines our organization, and this is further restricted by the data structures that we have available. As much as this step may aid in our own understanding of nature, it is important to recognize that which is lost. As an example, in deconstructing our environment and dedicating our resources to a species –specific conservation approach, it may be easy to overlook, lose focus of or “forget” the emergent properties that arise (cite Hayles ch 1). This is a significant act, as the nature of our ecosystem relies in this ability to create variance, to expose these variant species to their habitat, and to adapt and evolve in this process. Without the ability to recognize the actors in this process, we essentially exclude them from our memory practices. This becomes increasingly important as these habitats disappear as a function of human population growth (Wilson 2003, pg 50-51).


3. Biopower

	With a crisis as encompassing as the biodiversity crisis, steps towards species and habitat protection are considerable measures. In the 1980’s, conservation efforts focused on preserving biodiversity hotspots - regions of very high species and habitat variance and areas of most concern. Over the next decade, conservation trends drifted away from preserving the hotspot as a whole towards efforts to deconstruct this abstraction. Science and policy shifted towards understanding the species and their roles within an ecosystem, as well as understanding how these species could be of benefit to us. In the 1990s, a global census of biodiversity was started with the hopes of taking an inventory of all the earth’s species and determining areas of greatest conservation needs (Youatt, 2015, pg. 25-47). 
	
	In his book “Counting Species”, Rafi Youatt writes of the Foucauldian concept of biopower. This concept, which concerns the ways in which power operate on living bodies themselves, applies well to the concept of the biodiversity census. In allowing our self-constructed classification of the earth’s species to guide our conservation efforts, we are exercising a form of control that limits the life and death of species or habitat to the human subjects responsible for the counting and categorizing. While on one hand the exertion of this power over nonhuman species may be the only way in which humans can evaluate and manage our impact, biotic life does not self-regulate in the same way. While this exclusion from self-regulation may mean that nonhuman life suffers from the constraints that we place, Youatt argues that this does not remove these organisms from this framework of biopower. In fact, they play a role in the self-regulation of humans, as evidenced by our government’s responses to invasive species, resistant bug strains, and organisms that are vectors for infectious pathogens (2015). 
	
	This argument raises questions over our museological approach to preserving plant biodiversity. In exerting this control over ecological preservation, do we remove the agency of nonhumans to resist our normalizing forces? The ways in which biopower is retained by biotic organisms differs from that of humans. Nonhumans, Youatt writes, rely on “their own semiotic interpretations of the environment and act accordingly...through migrating, reproducing,consuming resources, and filling ecological niches in unexpected ways” (2015, p.48). Controlling and, arguably, suppressing the ability of nonhumans to govern these behaviors forces a paradigm of control over a body that is constitutionally resistant to it. Without maintaining a balance of biopower between human and nonhuman species, conserving the state of biodiversity as it exists today will prove unattainable. In balancing our efforts to a more holistic understanding of our environment, one that can empower
