1 Introduction

As world population and food demand increases, and the looming threats of climate change intensify, conserving the diversity of both our crop plants as well as related wild species becomes increasingly imperative. In the last 100 years, more than 90% of crop varieties have disappeared from the world’s farms, and currently an estimated 75% of the world’s food comes from only 12 plant species. Industrial agriculture’s reliance on pesticides and practices of monocropping have resulted in an erosion of crop genetic diversity (Shiva, 2015).  Access to diverse plant species allows farmers and plant breeders to produce crop varieties that are more resilient and better adapted to their local habitat, resulting in a much greater crop yield and a stronger and more secure food source (Plucknett & Nigel, 1987, p. 3).  As such, the genetic information preserved within each plant species remains a tremendously valuable natural resource in combating genetic drift and the loss of crop varieties. 

With growing necessity and urgency placed on conserving the genetic information of crop species comes the very practical question of preservation. While crop diversity has historically been maintained informally through cultivation and seed collection within farm communities, larger scale seed banks have increasingly become the answer to limitations in space and resources. They provide a centralized repository for collecting and storing crop seeds and allow for the protection of present crop varieties as well as antique or rare plant species that are no longer cultivated (Plucknett & Nigel, 1987, p. 4).

As seed storage and preservation grows in both necessity and popularity, with it grows the need to understand and evaluate the impact and efficacy of these banks. One of the primary incentives for storing seeds is preserving diversity, and consequently characterizing the present state of seed repositories may offer the ability to observe trends and identify phenotypes or growth conditions that are over and underrepresented in current collections.

The pages that follow offer an attempt to not only characterize the diversity represented in one large scale seed bank, but outlines a visual solution to the complex problem of meaningfully interpreting this. While data mining and processing can bridge archival information and species characteristics, the scope and complexity of this data and these relationships is obscured without the ability to appropriately interact with them. By focusing on the Svalbard Global Seed Bank, currently considered to have the most diverse collection on earth, this thesis outlines a process for representing the diversity within one seed bank and investigating how rich a representation of the planet’s plant biodiversity these archives provide.
